R BCARORTHVESOFCHR FROM
ALL NITED KIAND ALLWALKS OF LIF
COTO FORM
THEIPERSONALIES?
FOLLOWG THCH AS THROW
THCHD!WORKEDT WHO TH ARENA
T WHAT THEARE IS
L PROVG TRKY
I DON'T KNOW.
EYNING LEMSEW  OKAUTI
NE
YES.
TH IS THYEAR W
SOOFIDE
SONTY ANACCIDENTF BIRTH
ORAN WE CHOOSE
WHO WE BECOME?
ONN BRAIN
SOCIFERENC WVERYH SIO OT
GHHA IA  OUPPECLSFOR YR HE
NOWADAYS THE BOUNDARIES
ARE A BIT MORE BLURRED.
BUT AT FIVE, DO OUR
CHILDREN EVEN UNDERSTAND
WHAT IT MEANS TO
BE RICH OR POOR,
AND THAT THEIR SOCIAL
CLASS MAY GIVE THEM
MORE OR LESS
OPPORTUNITY IN LIFE?
THIS IS PECKHAM, THE
HOME OF JAMES CACHIA.
HE'S BEING RAISED IN
ONE OF THE POOREST
COUNCIL ESTATES IN
SOUTH-EAST LONDON.
JAMES LIVES WITH HIS MOM
CAROL AND SISTER BERNIE.
WHICH ONE OF YOU'S
GOING CHIP SHOP?
PUT YOUR SOCKS
AND TROUSERS ON.
CAROL DOESN'T WORK BUT
LIFE AT HOME IS NEVER DULL.
THE HOUSE IS ALWAYS
FULL OF VISITORS.
JAMES IS NO STRANGER TO
CHAOS, BUT HOW WILL HIS
ENVIRONMENT AFFECT
HOW HE SEES HIMSELF?
THINGS HAVE NEVER
BEEN EASY FOR CAROL.
SHE WAS BROUGHT
UP IN CARE,
AND WHEN JAMES WAS BORN SHE
AND HER BOYFRIEND, JAMIE,
WERE DETERMINED TO GIVE
HIM A DIFFERENT LIFE.
BUT THINGS DIDN'T GO
ACCORDING TO PLAN.
THREE YEARS LATER
JAMES'S DAD LEFT
AND CAROL FOUND
A NEW BOYFRIEND.
THE RELATIONSHIP
WAS SHORT LIVED.
JAMES, GET OFF
THERE, PLEASE.
JAMES, GET OFF PLEASE.
BUT ITS SHADOW STILL
HANGS OVER THE FAMILY.
CAROL'S BOYFRIEND HAD
A HISTORY OF VIOLENCE
AND NOW JAMES'S WHOLE
FAMILY COULD BE AT RISK.
HE CAME ROUND THREATENING ME
- TOOK A KNIFE TO ME AND THAT.
I'VE GONE TO THE POLICE
AND THEY'RE GONNA GET ME
MOVED OUT OF HERE BECAUSE
I'M UNDER RISK WHAT WITH
THE THREATS AND THAT AND
THE POLICE ARE SAYING
THAT I'M NOT SAFE
HERE ANYMORE.
CAROL FEELS TOO SCARED
TO SLEEP AT THE FLAT.
I JUST DON'T WANT TO STAY
HERE 'CUZ I DON'T WANT
TO TAKE ANY RISKS.
SO SHE AND THE CHILDREN ARE
TRYING TO STAY WITH FRIENDS
WHENEVER THEY CAN.
WHERE DID YOU STAY
LAST NIGHT, JAMES?
I STAYED AT MY
FRIEND'S HOUSE.
IS HE NICE?
NO.
HE'S A BIG FAT MAN.
THAT'S NOT NICE!
AND HE'S AN IDIOT.
THEY ARE STARTING TO PICK
UP ON IT A LITTLE BIT.
ASKING ME WHAT'S GOING ON
AND THAT AND ME AND MY
FRIEND JUST TELLS THEM
THAT THERE'S A BOGEYMAN
HANGING AROUND AND WE
CAN'T STAY IN THE HOUSE.
BUT CAROL'S STORIES
AREN'T FOOLING ANYONE.
WHY DID YOU STAY AT
YOUR FRIEND'S HOUSE?
I'LL TELL YOU.
ALRIGHT THEN, YOU
CAN BOTH TELL ME.
WE AIN'T SAFE HERE.
WHY IS THAT?
BECAUSE OF THE HEARTS.
NO, NO, IT'S
BECAUSE OF HIM.
DON'T MENTION THAT MAN.
HE'S JUST RUINED IT ALL
NOW 'CUZ I THOUGHT THAT
ME AND HIM WOULD BE GETTING
ON REALLY WELL AND THAT
AND I THOUGHT
WE'D BE CLOSE.
I THOUGHT HE'D PROTECT
ME BUT NOT ANY MORE.
AND JAMES IS LEARNING NOT
TO EXPECT TOO MUCH FROM LIFE.
WHERE'S YOUR DREAM
PLACE TO LIVE?
I DON'T KNOW.
I DON'T FUCKING KNOW.
LET GO OF MY HAND!
ALL THE CHANGES IN JAMES'S
LIFE ARE TAKING THEIR TOLL
AND HIS BEHAVIOR HAS TAKEN
A TURN FOR THE WORSE.
YOU'RE GOING TO
YOUR BED TONIGHT
WITH SO MUCH
GOING ON AT HOME,
WILL JAMES'S
EDUCATION BE AFFECTED?
ONCE HE ARRIVES AT NURSERY
HE'S A DIFFERENT CHILD.
HE'S HAD TO HANDLE A
LOT OF CHANGES THAT'S
HAPPENING IN HIS LIFE ALL
THE TIME - GOOD AND BAD -
THERE'S CHANGES
HAPPENING WITH HIM,
BUT HE'S HANDLING IT VERY,
VERY WELL. VERY WELL.
IT IS VERY GOOD FOR A
CHILD OF THIS AGE
TO BE ABLE TO SEPARATE
HOME AND, YOU KNOW,
COME TO A NURSERY SETTING
AND JUST GET ON WITH IT
AND NOT REALLY
LET IT DISTURB HIM
THROUGHOUT THE
DAY, YOU KNOW?
I THINK THAT'S A REALLY
GOOD SKILL JAMES HAS GOT.
JAMES SEEMS TO HAVE
LEARNED TO PROTECT HIMSELF
FROM WHAT GOES ON AT HOME.
HE'S WORKING HARD AT
NURSERY AND, WHAT'S MORE,
HE'S ONE OF THE MOST
POPULAR BOYS AT SCHOOL
WITH A FIRM BEST FRIEND.
JAMES, TELL ME WHO
YOUR BEST FRIEND IS.
YOU KNOW!
YHAVANI!
THE LITTLE PUPPY DOGGY.
BUT JAMES COULD BE ABOUT
TO LOSE HIS SANCTUARY.
FOR THEIR SAFETY, CAROL
IS TRYING TO MOVE,
AND JAMES MAY HAVE TO SAY
GOODBYE TO HIS FRIENDS.
HE AIN'T PLEASED
TO SEE ME, LOOK.
WAIT!
AT THE END OF THE DAY
JAMES RETURNS TO HIS MOM
AND THE TURBULENT
WORLD OUTSIDE NURSERY.
SEE, I PICKED YOU UP
NOW, GARLIC BREATH.
GARLIC BREATH.
OH, YOUR BREATH STINKS.
SMELL MY BREATH!
UGH, YUCKY!
JAMES MAY BE RESILIENT,
BUT ARE HIS EXPERIENCES
ALREADY AFFECTING HIS
EXPECTATIONS FOR THE FUTURE?
WHEN DO WE BECOME AWARE
OF LIFE'S INEQUALITIES?
WE'VE ASKED OUR CHILDREN
TO IMAGINE THE PEOPLE
LIVING IN TWO
DIFFERENT HOUSES.
CAN YOU TELL ME, DO YOU
THINK THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE
IN THIS HOUSE HAVE MORE
MONEY OR LESS MONEY?
MORE MONEY.
SO, ARE THEY RICH OR POOR?
RICH.
THEY'RE RICH.
AND THAT ONE'S POOR.
AND WHICH CHILD IS HAPPY?
THE CHILD WHO LIVES
IN THIS HOUSE
OR THE CHILD WHO
LIVES IN THIS HOUSE?
THAT ONE.
IS THIS GIRL HAPPY OR
IS THIS GIRL HAPPY?
THIS GIRL.
THIS HOUSE.
WHO DO YOU LIKE, THE
PEOPLE IN THIS HOUSE
OR THE PEOPLE
IN THIS HOUSE?
THE GOOD PEOPLE.
THE GOOD PEOPLE. WHERE
DO THE GOOD PEOPLE LIVE?
IN THIS HOUSE?
WHAT DOES THIS CHILD
GET TEASED ABOUT?
BECAUSE HER FAMILY
AREN'T VERY NICE TO HER.
WHAT DO THEY DO TO HER?
THEY BASH HER AND CRUSH
HER AND MAKE HER GET BUMPS.
AND WHAT DO CHILDREN
TEASE THIS BOY ABOUT?
THEY DON'T TEASE HIM.
NO ONE TEASES HER.
HOW COME?
HOW COME NOBODY
TEASES THIS CHILD?
BECAUSE SHE WANTS TO LIVE WITH
HER MOMMY AND DADDY SAFELY.
NO MATTER WHAT
THEIR BACKGROUND,
OUR CHILDREN HAVE
VERY SET IDEAS ABOUT
THE CONSEQUENCES OF
BEING RICH OR POOR.
WHAT DOES THIS CHILD WANT
TO BE WHEN SHE GROWS UP?
A MOMMY.
SHE WANTS TO BE A MOMMY?
WHAT KIND OF JOB
DOES SHE WANT?
TIDY UP THE HOUSE.
HER HOUSE OR OTHER
PEOPLE'S HOUSES?
OTHER PEOPLE'S HOUSES.
AND WHAT ABOUT THIS GIRL?
WHAT KIND OF JOB
DOES SHE WANT TO BE?
SHE THINKS SHE WANTS
TO BE A TEACHER.
SO, DOES THE ECONOMIC
POSITION OF THEIR OWN
FAMILIES INFLUENCE
WHAT THEY WANT TO BE?
ARE YOU GOING TO
OWN THIS BUSINESS?
I'M GOING TO OWN
THIS BUSINESS.
AND YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE
PEOPLE WORK FOR YOU?
YES.
NOW DO YOU THINK THAT'S
REALLY GOING TO HAPPEN
IN YOUR LIFE?
YES.
HOW COME?
HOW COME YOU'RE GONNA
BE ABLE TO DO THAT?
IT'S A SECRET.
HELENA COMES FROM
A WELL-OFF FAMILY.
HER CERTAINTY ABOUT THE
FUTURE IS VERY DIFFERENT
TO JAMES'S.
WHAT WILL THE CHILD IN THIS
HOUSE BE WHEN HE GROWS UP?
NO, I'M IN THAT HOUSE.
WHAT IS HE GOING TO
BE IN THIS HOUSE?
WHAT'S HE WANT TO BE?
UM.. I DON'T KNOW.
JUST GUESS.
DON'T KNOW.
OKAY, DO YOU KNOW WHAT
THIS CHILD WANTS TO BE
WHEN HE GROWS UP?
I'M THE CHILD.
YES. OKAY, SO WHAT DO YOU
WANT TO BE WHEN YOU GROW UP?
YOU DON'T KNOW?
HAVE YOU THOUGHT
ABOUT SOME THINGS? NO?
I'M THE CHILD!
IN YORKSHIRE, FOR WILLIAM
ROBERTS, THE SKY'S THE LIMIT.
HE'S LEARNING SOME VERY
DIFFERENT LESSONS AS TO
WHAT LIFE IS ALL ABOUT.
HE'S BEING BROUGHT
UP IN THE HEART OF
THE YORKSHIRE DALES.
WITH A STABLE, AFFLUENT HOME
LIFE AND A PRIVATE EDUCATION,
WILLIAM HAS ALL THE ODDS
STACKED IN HIS FAVOR.
IT'S A RECIPE FOR SUCCESS.
BUT THIS ISN'T THE WORLD
HIS MOM, GILLIAN, GREW UP IN.
MY PARENTS WERE
WORKING CLASS.
MY MOTHER HAS ALWAYS
WORKED AT THE LOCAL
OLD PEOPLE'S HOME IN THE
LAUNDRY AND MY FATHER
USED TO WORK AT
THE WATER BOARD.
GILLIAN MARRIED
INTO A WELL-OFF,
ESTABLISHED
LOCAL FAMILY.
WILLIAM'S DAD, NEIL, IS A
THOROUGHBRED YORKSHIRE MAN.
IN HIS FAMILY, KEEPING UP
TRADITION IS IMPORTANT.
HE'S FOLLOWED IN HIS
FATHER'S FOOTSTEPS AS A VET.
BOTH OUR FAMILIES FOR
GENERATIONS HAVE LIVED IN
THE IMMEDIATE VICINITY OF
SETTLE AND GIGGLESWICK.
AT THE MOMENT THERE'S QUITE
A HEATED DEBATE IN SETTLE
AS TO WHETHER WE SHOULD
HAVE A SUPERMARKET OR NOT.
NEIL WANTS HIS CHILDREN TO
ENJOY THE SAME PRIVILEGES
THAT LIFE IN A RURAL
COMMUNITY HAS GIVEN HIM.
THE QUALITY OF LIFE
IN THE COUNTRYSIDE
IS GREATER THAN
THE QUALITY OF LIFE
BROUGHT UP IN
TOWNS OR CITIES.
DEEP DOWN, ANY FATHER
WOULD PROBABLY LIKE A SON
AND HEIR TO FOLLOW IN
THEIR FATHER'S FOOTSTEPS.
AND I MAKE NO BONES ABOUT
IT, I WOULD BE PROUD IF
ANY OF MY CHILDREN WANTED
TO FOLLOW IN MY FOSTEPS.
NEIL SPENDS VIRTUALLY ALL
HIS SPARE TIME DOING SPORT.
AND WILLIAM'S TURNING OUT
TO BE JUST LIKE HIS DAD.
WILLIAM LOVES ANYTHING TO
DO WITH PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
- FOOTBALL,
RUNNING AROUND -
HE'S DEAD KEEN SO I'M SURE
HE'LL FOLLOW IN MY FOOTSTEPS.
NEIL AND WILLIAM ARE
THE SAME PERSON ALMOST.
THEY ARE, AND I'VE KNOWN
THAT FOR A LONG WHILE.
THEY'RE JUST THE SAME.
IN FACT, I SAID TO NEIL
ONLY THE OTHER NIGHT,
"I LOVE YOU VERY MUCH AND
HOPEFULLY WE'LL ALWAYS
BE TOGETHER,
BUT I DO WORRY THAT
SOMEONE'S GOING TO END
UP DIVORCING WILLIAM".
(LAUGHS)
DO YOU WANT A
SANDWICH, WILLIAM?
WILLIAM'S THE YOUNGEST
IN THE FAMILY.
HE'S GOT 6-YEAR-OLD TWIN
SIBLINGS CHARLES AND ALICE.
BUT IT'S CLEAR THAT
WILLIAM HAS A SPECIAL BOND
WITH HIS DAD.
IT'S A TRADITIONAL FAMILY
WHERE NEIL EARNS THE MONEY
AND GILLIAN
STAYS AT HOME.
AND WILLIAM'S NEVER BEEN
ENCOURAGED TO STRAY
TOO FAR FROM HIS
GENDER STEREOTYPE.
I'M A BIT OF A
TRADITIONALIST AND
I MUST ADMIT I DO GET
BOYS' THINGS FOR THE BOYS
AND GIRLS' THINGS
FOR ALICE.
IF HE WANTS NOTHING TO DO
WITH DOLLS AND JUST WANTS
TO PLAY WITH TRAINS AND
CARS I'LL BE QUITE HAPPY.
I'LL BE MORE THAN HAPPY.
MOMMY'S NAUGHTY.
IT'S THE YEAR 2000,
WE'RE NOT MEANT TO
DO THAT SORT OF
THING, ARE WE?
NO. YOU'RE MEANT TO
BE A NEW MAN.
THERE. WHAT DO YOU SAY?
- PLEASE.
AND THEN?
- THANK YOU.
GILLIAN MIGHT NOT WANT
HER SON TO BREAK THE MOULD
WHEN IT COMES TO
BEING A PROPER BOY.
BUT WITH WILLIAM'S FUTURE
SHE'S MORE ADVENTUROUS.
I DON'T PARTICULARLY WANT
HIM JUST HANGING ROUND HERE.
I'D BE VERY HAPPY FOR HIM
TO GO OFF AND WORK ABROAD
OR ANYWHERE.
KEEN TO GET WILLIAM
OUT OF SETTLE,
GILLIAN'S ALREADY STARTED
TO PLAN HIS ESCAPE.
SHE WANTS TO MOVE - EVEN
IF IT'S JUST A FEW MILES
DOWN THE ROAD.
I'M...
"I'M HAPPY WHERE I AM".
I LIKE WHERE WE LIVE
NOW BUT I CAN SEE
GILLIAN'S REASONS
FOR WANTING TO MOVE.
I DO SOMETIMES THINK THAT
LIFE'S TOO SHORT TO WANT TO
BE STUCK IN THIS SAME LITTLE
PATCH OF EARTH FOREVER.
I WANT TO DO
SOMETHING ELSE.
MOMMY, WHERE'S WILLIAM?
HMM? WHO KNOWS
WHERE WILLIAM IS?
NOT ONE TO BE DETERRED ONCE
SHE'S GOT A GOAL IN MIND,
GILLIAN'S PUT THE FAMILY
HOUSE ON THE MARKET
EVEN THOUGH SHE'S THE ONLY
ONE WHO WANTS TO MOVE.
IF WILLIAM'S GOT HIS
DAD'S MANLY SPORTINESS,
HE'S GOT A STEELY
DETERMINATION FROM HIS MOM.
IT CAN BE A DEADLY
COMBINATION.
(CRYING)
ALICE! YOU DON'T DO THAT!
YOU DON'T DO THAT!
(CRYING)
BEING A BOY IS A VERY
IMPORTANT PART OF
WILLIAM'S IDENTITY.
IT'S ONE OF THE EARLIEST
LESSONS CHILDREN LEARN
ABOUT WHO THEY ARE.
COME BEDTIME, HE'S GOT
A FIGHT ON HIS HANDS
AS HIS MOTHER THREATENS TO
INTRODUCE A GIRLY TOUCH.
WILLIAM DID SEE SOME PINK
THINGS THAT HE WANTED
FOR HIS BEDROOM.
NO, I DIDN'T!
NO, HE SAW A NICE PINK
BED WITH A PINK DUVET.
NOOO!
I THOUGHT IT WOULD BE NICE
IF YOU HAD SOME PINK THINGS.
SO, YOU DON'T WANT
A PINK BEDROOM THEN?
NO.
WHY NOT?
BECAUSE I DON'T
HAVE LONG HAIR.
I WANT TO BE A BOY.
I DON'T SEE WHAT'S
WRONG WITH PINK.
WHY DON'T YOU HAVE
A BOY'S BEDROOM?
I DON'T MIND IF MY
BEDROOM'S GREEN OR BLUE.
GOD WILL TURN
YOU INTO A BOY.
THERE'S A GOOD REASON WHY
WILLIAM'S UNSETTLED
BY ANYTHING
REMOTELY FEMININE.
BY THE AGE OF TWO,
MOST CHILDREN CAN
TELL YOU THEIR SEX.
ARE YOU A GIRL OR A BOY?
BOY.
GIRL.
I'M A MAN, MY
MOMMY TOLD ME.
AT THIS AGE THEY PREFER TO
STICK WITH THEIR OWN GROUP.
I'VE ONLY GOT TWO FRIENDS,
JEMIMA AND JESSICA.
GUY.
ALEX.
CAITLIN.
CAROLINE.
KIRSTY.
AIDEN.
PHOEBE.
MY MOM AND MY DAD.
BUT WHAT DO THEY THINK
THEY'LL BE WHEN THEY GROW UP?
WOMAN.
MAN.
I'LL BE A MAN.
I DON'T KNOW,
I DON'T KNOW.
BUT THERE'S A MAJOR FLAW
IN THEIR UNDERSTANDING.
IS KEN A BOY OR A GIRL?
A BOY.
MAN.
BOY.
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN YOU
CHANGE THE CLOTHES?
IS KEN A BOY
OR A GIRL NOW?
A GIRL.
AMAZINGLY, THEY
THINK GENDER CHANGES
WITH CLOTHES
AND HAIR LENGTH.
A GIRL.
WHAT IF WE CUT THAT
DOLL'S HAIR OFF?
IT'LL BE A BOY AND IF
WE PUT HIS LONG HAIR
THEN IT
WOULD BE A GIRL.
FOR 4-YEAR-OLDS, GENDER
IS STILL SO FLUID
IT'S SAFER TO STICK WITH
THE RULES RIGIDLY.
BUT IT DON'T HAVE TO
HAVE THIS DRESS ON.
'CUZ MEN DON'T
WEAR DRESSES.
HE DOESN'T WEAR
BALLET CLOTHES!
AT THIS AGE, APPEARANCE
IS ALL IMPORTANT.
I WANT YOU TO
DO IT LIKE THIS.
DO IT LIKE THAT?
- YEAH.
OUR CHILDREN ARE STARTING
TO FORM SOME STRONG IDEAS
ABOUT HOW THEY
SHOULD LOOK.
EVEN AT THIS YOUNG AGE
THEY'RE ABSORBING SOME
IMPORTANT MESSAGES.
LIKE THIS.
YOU LIKE IT LIKE THAT?
YEAH.
HOW CONFIDENT WE ARE ABOUT
OUR PHYSICAL APPEARANCE
FORMS A CRUCIAL PART
OF OUR IDENTITY AND
HAS A POWERFUL IMPACT ON
OUR PATH THROUGH LIFE.
I'LL DO YOUR HAIR.
GO ON THEN, YOU CAN
DO MY HAIR, COME ON.
BY THE TIME WE'RE ADULTS,
OUR APPEARANCE IS
FUNDAMENTAL TO HOW WE
FEEL ABOUT OURSELVES.
THERE YOU ARE.
YOU CUT MY HAIR.
YOU CAN.
YOU'RE GOING TO MAKE ME
LOOK LIKE A WILD PROFESSOR,
AREN'T YOU?
CAN YOU REACH?
OH, WHAT DO YOU THINK?
DO YOU THINK
I LOOK BETTER?
YEAH.
I THINK I LOOK TERRIBLE.
THE SAUNDERS FAMILY
LIVE IN ESSEX.
IN 1999 THEY ALREADY
HAD A SON, DAVID.
WHEN GILL FOUND
OUT SHE WAS PREGNANT
SHE HAD VERY STRONG
IDEAS ABOUT HOW
SHE WOULD WANT A
DAUGHTER TO LOOK.
I HOPE I DON'T, IF I HAVE
A GIRL, IT'S NOT INTO
FRILLY DRESSES AND HAIR
BANDS 'CUZ I'M NOT INTO
ALL OF THAT AND I WOULDN'T
KNOW WHERE TO START.
I REALLY WOULDN'T KNOW.
BUT WHEN REBECCA WAS BORN
GILL KNEW JUST WHERE TO START.
IT'S A NOVELTY
HAVING A GIRL.
I KEEP LOOKING
DOWN AND THINKING
"WHY IS DAVID IN PINK"?
FIVE YEARS ON, THIS IS HOW
GILL'S NO FRILLS DAUGHTER
TURNED OUT.
IT'S VERY PRETTY.
THESE ARE PRETTY COLORS.
WHO CHOSE THE COLORS?
ME.
I DIDN'T WANT BLUE.
DRESSED IN PINK
FROM DAY ONE,
REBECCA'S ALWAYS
BEEN A GIRLS' GIRL.
MY EARS ARE COVERED IN
MAKE-UP, MY EYES ARE
COVERED IN MAKE-UP, MY
LIPS ARE COVERED IN MAKE-UP.
LIKE WILLIAM ROBERTS,
REBECCA'S LATCHED ONTO
THE MESSAGE THAT PINK
MAKES YOU A GIRL
AND BLUE MAK YOU A BOY.
SO, WHAT OTHER MESSAGES
IS REBECCA PICKING UP
ABOUT HOW SHE SHOULD
OR SHOULDN'T LOOK?
SCIENTISTS BELIEVE THAT
OUR SELF-CONFIDENCE AND
HOW WE FEEL ABOUT OUR
BODIES IS GREATLY INFLUENCED
BY HOW OUR PARENTS FELT
ABOUT THEIR BODIES.
WE'VE ASKED OUR PARENTS
HOW THEY RATE THEMSELVES.
I LOVE MY WRISTS.
FOR MY LEFT FOOT, FOUR;
FOR MY RIGHT FOOT, TWO.
I'LL GIVE THAT A
FIVE, MY CHEST.
I'M QUITE HAPPY WITH THAT.
THEY'VE BEEN ASKED TO
GIVE ALL THE PARTS
OF THEIR BODIES A
SCORE OUT OF FIVE.
ONE, OH.
I'M QUITE PROUD OF MY CHEST
SO I'LL GIVE IT A FOUR.
MY HANDS ARE THE HANDS OF A
SURGEON AND I LOVE MY HANDS.
SO, HOW DOES REBECCA'S
MOM, GILL, RATE HER BODY?
MY BUM IS 100%
A NUMBER ONE.
BIG WIDE HIPS -
CHILD BEARING HIPS.
MY FINGERS ARE TOO FAT.
MY WAIST IS TOO FAT.
OH, MY LEGS.
WE DON'T LIKE MY LEGS.
NO, I DON'T LIKE MY TOES
EITHER, THEY'RE FUNNY SHAPES.
I WEIGH FAR TOO MUCH.
ENORMOUS.
ONE. ONE.
I HATE MY BODY.
TOO BIG AND TOO CHUNKY.
NOT A PEACH.
MORE LIKE A WATERMELON.
EVERYTHING APART FROM
MY EYES ABOUT MY FACE.
I HATE THE WAY I LOOK.
I ABSOLUTELY HATE
THE WAY I LOOK.
I'D CHANGE EVERYTHING.
IF I COULD AFFORD
PLASTIC SURGERY
I WOULD GO FOR
THE FULL WORKS.
GILL GAVE HERSF BY FAR THE
LOWE SCORE IN THE GROUP.
AND SHE'S ALREADY MAKING
ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT
HOW REBECCA'S BODY
IMAGE WILL TURN OUT.
WITH HOW SHE LOOKS, I
DOUBT VERY MUCH SHE'LL
LIKE HOW SHE LOOKS
BECAUSE I THINK SHE'S
GONNA BE SHORT LIKE ME
AND I THINK SHE'S GOING
TO BE PRONE TO PUT ON
WEIGHT LIKE ME AND
I DON'T THINK SHE'LL BE
HAPPY WITH THAT;
BECAUSE I DON'T THINK...
I DON'T THINK SHE WILL.
SHE MIGHT PROVE ME WRONG.
AT THE MOMENT, REBECCA'S
FAR FROM BEING FAT.
ONE OF THE DOCTORS
RECOMMENDED THAT WE HAD
HER CHECKED BECAUSE SHE
WAS BELOW THE GUIDE
FOR HER HEIGHT.
I MEAN, CLOTHES-WISE NOW
SHE'S STILL IN AGE 2-3.
SHE IS SMALL.
HE SAID WE MIGHT
LIKE TO THINK ABOUT
GROWTH HORMONES
AT SOME FUTURE STAGE.
HE DIDN'T SUGGEST
SHE HAD TO HAVE IT,
HE SAID WE MIGHT
LIKE TO CONSIDER IT.
BUT WE WON'T CONSIDER
THAT AT ALL.
GILL'S WORRIED THAT
REBECCA WILL SUCCUMB TO
THE TEMPTATIONS OF THEIR
PARTICULAR WAY OF LIFE.
I'M CONVINCED JEWISH PEOPLE
ARE NOT MADE TO BE THIN
BECAUSE EVERY FESTIVAL
THERE'S A SPECIAL FOOD
CONNECTED WITH IT, WHICH I
SUPPOSE YOU DON'T HAVE TO EAT
BUT I LIKE TO KEEP THINGS
PROPERLY SO I DO EAT.
THAT'S NOT TOO
HEAVY. GOT IT?
NO, USE TWO HANDS.
WELL, I HOPE THAT
WASN'T THE EGGS.
REBECCA'S GETTING LOTS
OF COMPLICATED MESSAGES
ABOUT THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN FOOD AND BODY SIZE.
AND MEAL TIMES ARE STARTING
TO BECOME A BIT OF AN ISSUE.
CAN YOU EAT IT RATHER
THAN PLAY WITH IT, PLEASE.
IT'S TAKE IT OR LEAVE IT.
THE KIDS CAN HAVE A
CHOICE IN WHAT THEY EAT
AND THEN I MAKE IT AND
IF THEY DON'T EAT IT,
THEY LEAVE IT AND THEY
DON'T GET ANYTHING ELSE.
TAKE IT OR LEAVE IT.
SAME FOR MY MOTHER IN LAW.
SHE TAKES IT OR
SHE LEAVES IT.
WHAT DO YOU NORMALLY
DO, REBECCA?
TAKE IT OR LEAVE IT?
LEAVE IT.
OH, HOW TRUE.
I DON'T EAT A LOT.
WHY DON'T YOU EAT A LOT?
I DON'T FEEL HUNGRY.
REBECCA'S APPETITE MAY BE
SMALL SIMPLY BECAUSE SHE IS.
I'M GOING TO CAST A
MAGIC SPELL ON YOU.
IZZY WIZZY,
LET'S GET BUSY.
WHAT SHOULD WE
TURN YOU INTO?
A PRINCESS.
YOU ARE ONE.
WHAT ELSE CAN WE
TURN YOU INTO?
YOU.
YOU WANT TO BECOME ME?
YOU'RE BEAUTIFUL.
WHY DO YOU WANT TO BE ?
YOU DON'T WANT TO BE M
BUT SHE MAY BE RESPONDING
TO HER MOTHER'S
MIXED FEELINGS ABOUT
FOOD AND BODY SIZE.
JAMES CACHIA'S FAMILY
HAD TO LEAVE HOME
IN A HURRY LAST
NIGHT AFTER ANOTHER
VISIT FROM CAROL'S
EX-BOYFRIEND.
IN DESPERATION SHE'S
ENDED UP IN A HOTEL.
HE RANG ME ON MY MOBILE
FROM MY HOUSE PHONE.
HE'S BROKEN A WINDOW TO
GET IN AND HE'S SAYING
THAT HE'S SMASHED
UP A FEW THINGS.
COME AND LAY DOWN
FOR FIVE MINUTES.
GET ME JAMES'S
TRAINERS PLEASE.
JAMES, PUT YOUR FOOT IN.
CAN YOU STOP NOW.
EVERY YEAR I SEEM TO
BE HAVING PROBLEMS.
EVERY TIME I SEE SOMEONE
IT JUST ENDS UP AS DISASTER.
I'M DREADING MY FUTURE
'CUZ I DON'T KNOW WHAT
IT'S GOING TO HOLD.
I JUST DON'T KNOW
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN
INHE YEARS TO COME.
I JUST WANT HIM TO GO TO
COLLEGE AND HAVE A GOOD FUTURE.
OH, SOMETIMES THEIR NAN SAYS
IT COULD BE ALL TOO LATE,
YOU KNOW, TO MAKE THEM
HAPPY BUT I CAN DO IT.
I CAN MAKE THEM HAPPY.
TAKE THEM TO THE SEASIDE,
TO THE PARK AND THAT.
IT'LL BE GOOD.
CAROL'S LEAVING JAMES AND
BERNIE WITH RELATIVES
FOR A FEW DAYS.
I'M GONNA DROP THE
KIDS TO SEE THEIR NAN
AND WE'LL SEE HOW
THINGS GO FROM THERE.
I'M A BIT UPSET 'CUZ
I'D RATHER TAKE THEM
HOME WITH ME, BUT
DEFINITELY BE SAFE.
WITH THE CHILDREN SAFE
ELSEWHERE, CAROL'S GOING
BACK TO THE FLAT TO
INSPECT THE DAMAGE.
HE'S BROKEN THE AIR VENT.
MUST HAVE PUT HIS HAND THROUGH
TO OPEN THE WINDOW THERE.
TALK ABOUT BEING SAFE.
HE BROKE MY CHEST OF
DRAWERS THAT I HAD IN HERE.
AND A PLATE'S BEEN
SMASHED BUT THAT'S ABOUT IT.
WITH STILL NO WORD FROM
THE HOUSING OFFICE,
SHE'S TAKING MATTERS
INTO HER OWN HANDS.
CAN YOU PUT ME THROUGH
TO THE HOMELESS UNIT?
YEAH, IS THERE ANY ADVICE
THAT YOU CAN GIVE ME
'CUZ I WENT TO GO TO A
DIFFERENT BOROUGH TO FLEE
SOUTHWARK BUT I DIDN'T FIND
THEM VERY HELPFUL, SO...
I JUST WANT ME AND
THE KIDS TO BE HAPPY.
I'M ONLY DOING
IT FOR THE KIDS.
I'M NOT EVEN THINKING
ABOUT MYSELF.
CAROL STARTS GOING TO THE
HOUSING OFFICE EVERY DAY
TO TRY TO SPEED
THINGS UP.
SHE DOESN'T GET FAR.
A FEW DAYS LATER SHE HAS
TO HAVE THE CHILDREN BACK.
CAROL'S DESPERATE TO GO BUT
JAMES FEELS DIFFERENTLY.
HOW DO YOU FEEL ABOUT BEING
MOVED OUT OF HERE, JAMES?
ANGRY!
WHY?
WHY DON'T YOU WANT TO
MOVE OUT OF HERE, JAMES?
DO YOU WANT IAN
TO THREATEN US?
SHUT UP, BERNIE!
WHY DON'T YOU WANT TO
MOVE OUT OF HERE, JAMES?
BECAUSE I WANT TO
PLAY WITH DAPPO.
WE CAN COME AND
VISIT DAPPO.
DO YOU WANT TO LEAVE HERE
AND MOVE INTO A HOUSE
WITH A GARDEN?
OH, YEAH!
I SAID MAYBE.
THANK YOU!
ACTUALLY, WE CAN
LIVE IN BUTLINS.
OUR CHILDREN ARE NOW FIVE
AND NOW THEY'RE STARTING
TO SHIFT FROM BEING
ALL ME, ME, ME, ME
TO NOTICING
OTHER PEOPLE -
THAT THEY'RE VERY
SIMILAR TO SOME PEOPLE
AND ENTIRELY DIFFERENT
FROM OTHERS;
THAT SOME HAVE THE SAME
SKIN COLOR; AND OTHERS
HAVE A COMPLETELY
DIFFERENT SKIN COLOR.
AND HOW QUICKLY YOU
LEARN THAT DIFFERENCE
DEPENDS VERY LARGELY
ON THE ENVIRONMENT
WHERE YOU GROW UP.
TYRESE BLAKE-HAKEEM IS
GROWING UP IN INNER CITY
BIRMINGHAM WHERE MOST
OF HIS FRIENDS AND THE
OTHER CHILDREN IN HIS
NURSERY ARE BLACK.
HIS MOM, MARIE, HAS
ALWAYS BEEN CONCERNED
THAT TYRESE WOULD HAVE A HARD
TIME BEING BLACK AND MALE.
SO MUCH SO THAT SHE HOPED
TYRESE WOULD BE A GIRL.
I DIDN'T WANT BOYS. I
ALWAYS WANTED GIRLS.
I WAS GLAD WHEN
I HAD TWO GIRLS.
AND WHEN I FOUND OUT TYRESE
WAS A BOY IT WAS LIKE, OKAY.
LAST YEAR MARIE WAS TOLD
TYRESE MIGHT HAVE DYSLEXIA.
I THINK TYRESE WILL HAVE
A HARDER TIME COMPARED
TO SOME OF THE OTHER
CHILDREN, YES, BECAUSE
HE'S BLACK, BUT ALSO
BECAUSE HE'S A BLACK MALE
AND BECAUSE HE'S
DYSLEXIC, SO HE'S GOT
A LOT OF THINGS
STACKED AGAINST HIM.
HER FEARS AREN'T
UNFOUNDED.
BLACK MALES TEND TO DO
WORSE AT SCHOOL AND ARE
MORE LIKELY TO
GET INTO TROUBLE.
BUT NOW TYRESE FACES
ANOTHER CHALLENGE.
LAST YEAR HIS
PARENTS SEPARATED.
MARIE'S CONCERNED ABOUT
THE LONG TERM CONSEQUENCES.
THE THING THAT I'M
WORRIED ABOUT IS MORE
HIM GETTING IN TROUBLE WITH
THE POLICE, GOING DOWN
THE DRUGS ROUTE, GETTING
INTO FIGHTS, GUNS.
ALL THAT KIND OF STUFF IS
WHAT I'M REALLY, REALLY
WORRIED ABOUT AND THAT WOULD
BE MY WORST CASE SCENARIO
BECAUSE PEOPLE SAY
I'M COLD AND HEARTLESS
BUT IF HE GETS
HIMSELF INVOLVED IN THAT
THEN I'M STEPPING AWAY.
AT NURSERY THE STRAIN OF
HIS PARENTS' SEPARATION
IS STARTING TO SHOW.
AT THE BEGINNING IT WAS
SORT OF WHAT HAVE I DONE,
YOU KNOW?
I'VE, YOU KNOW, BROKEN
THE FAMILY HOME AND I'VE
MESSED UP THIS CHILD'S
HEAD AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
THE SCHOOL SORT OF ASKED
ME TO GO IN AND SORT OF
HAVE A WORD AND THEY WERE
CONCERNED, SAYING THAT
HIS BEHAVIOR AT SCHOOL
IS BECOMING QUITE BAD
WHERE HE'S NOT
LISTENING TO ANYTHING
THAT THEY'RE
TELLING HIM TO DO.
WHEN THEY SAY "SIT DOWN"
HE WILL STAND UP AND
ALWAYS THE OPPOSITE OF
WHAT HE'S BEING TOLD;
WETTING HIMSELF - HE WAS
ALSO POOING HIMSELF.
NOW HE'S A BIG BOY, HE KNOWS
HOW TO GO TO THE TOILET.
HE HAS NO ISSUES WITH
GOING TO THE TOILET
BUT I DON'T KNOW IF
HE'S SORT OF SAYING
"I'M WET, NOW YOU'VE GOT
TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT".
WHILST EVERYONE ELSE IS
HAVING FUN, TYRESE OFTEN
SEEMS WITHDRAWN AND
HE'S EASILY UPSET.
WELL, IT'S THE ORANGE ONE
OR YOU CAN'T HAVE A GO.
I WANT THE BLUE ONE.
WE'LL LEAVE IT ON THE
FLOOR AND IF YOU WANT
A TURN YOU CAN HAVE IT.
HE WANTED A BLUE RIBBON AND
WE'RE TRYING TO GET THAT HE
DOESN'T ALWAYS HAVE EXACTLY
WHAT HE SAYS HE WANTS.
TYRESE'S TEACHERS HAVE BEEN
KEEPING A CLOSE EYE ON HIM.
TO BEGIN WITH, I DON'T
THINK IT DID AFFECT HIM
BUT WHEN HE REALIZED THAT
MOM AND DAD WERE NOT
GOING TO BE PERMANENTLY
TOGETHER, AND, I THINK,
THE HOUSE WHERE HE'D BEEN
LIVING WITH BOTH MOM AND DAD,
THEY MOVED OUT OF, I THINK IT
BECAME MORE REAL TO HIM THEN
AND I THINK HE FOUND IT
DIFFICULT TO COPE WITH.
ARE YOU GOING TO
GO BACK IN NOW?
(CRYING LOUDLY)
WE HAVE WORKED WITH HIM,
TALKING ABOUT HOW YOU FEEL
AND THAT IT'S OKAY
TO FEEL SAD, YOU KNOW,
BUT TO TALK ABOUT IT.
YOU JUST GOT YOURSELF
IN A BIT OF A STATE,
DIDN'T YOU, MATE?
WOULD YOU LIKE
ANOTHER TISSUE?
BUT AT HOME THERE'S NOT A
LOT OF TIME FOR TALKING
ABOUT FEELINGS.
TYRESE HAS SPENT MOST
OF THE SUMMER HOLIDAYS
BEING LOOKED AFTER
BY HIS OLDER SISTERS,
TANEISHA AND CHANEL.
SINCE SHE'S BEEN ON HER
OWN, MARIE'S STRUGGLED
TO MAKE ENDS MEET AND IS
WORKING SIX DAYS A WEEK.
EVEN THOUGH TYRESE IS
ONLY FOUR, HE'S EXPECTED
TO DO HIS FAIR SHARE
AROUND THE HOUSE.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT THAT
THEY DO STUFF FOR THEMSELVES.
I GET TYRESE TO DO AS MUCH...
I GET THEM ALL TO DO AS MUCH,
'CUZ AT THE END OF THE DAY I
NEVER MADE ALL THIS MESS
SO WHY MUST I BE CLEANING
THAT UP, YOU KNOW?
THEY MADE THE MESS, THEY
SHOULD CLEAN IT UP.
YEAH!
(LAUGHTER)
MARIE HAD A
TOUGH CHILDHOOD.
SHE WAS BROUGHT UP TO
BE SELF-RELIANT AND SHE
WANTS TYRESE TO BE ABLE
TO LOOK AFTER HIMSELF.
JUST 'CUZ HE'S THE
MAN OR HE'S YOUNGER.
ONE FOR ALL AND
ALL FOR ONE.
EVERYBODY IN THERE
GIVING IT THEIR BEST.
CHANEL, DON'T DO THAT.
GIMME THE BALL.
TYRESE!
BUT THERE'S ONE ASPECT
OF TYRESE'S IDENTITY
THAT MARIE DOESN'T WANT
TO LEAVE TO CHANCE.
SHE WANTS HIM TO FEEL
POSITIVE ABOUT BEING BLACK.
*
LAST YEAR ON A TRIP TO NEW
YORK HE GOT HIS FIRST TASTE
OF BLACK HISTORY WITH A
GUIDED TOUR OF HARLEM.
YOU'RE WALKING DOWN MARTIN
LUTHER KING, JR. BOULEVARD.
DO YOU KNOW THAT, MY MAN?
'S SLIGHTLY OVER
TYRESE'S HEAD.
HE'S PROBABLY NOT EVEN
LISTENING TO A WORD
THE GUY'S SAYING
BUT I'LL BE ABLE TO
RECOUNT IT BACK TO
HIM AT LATER TIMES.
SO IS MARIE'S
STRATEGY WORKING?
WHAT DO 4-YEAR-OLDS
UNDERSTAND ABOUT
ETHNIC IDENTITY?
WE COMMISSIONED THE
UNIVERSITY OF KENT
TO DO SOME RESEARCH.
MOST 4-YEAR-OLDS KNOW
THEIR SKIN COLOR.
BUT WHAT DO THEY THINK WILL
HAPPEN WHEN THEY GROW UP?
WHEN YOU'RE A BIG BOY
WHICH OF THESE BIG BOYS
WILL YOU BE LIKE?
OVER HALF THINK THEIR SKIN
COLOR WILL CHANGE WITH AGE.
THE UNIVERSITY
RESEARCHERS INTERVIEWED
OVER 200 CHILDREN
FROM ALL OVER THE UK...
DO THESE ONES LIKE TV?
'CUZ THEY LIVE IN A
DIFFERENT COUNTRY
AND THEY DON'T
HAVE A TELEVISION.
...AND DISCOVERED WHICH
CHARACTERISTICS
THEY'D PUT WITH
EACH ETHNIC GROUP.
DO YOU THINK ANY OF
THEM WOULD BE KIND?
ANYBODY ELSE
OR IS THAT IT?
THAT'S IT.
DO YOU THINK ANY OF
THEM WOULD BE MEAN?
DO YOU THINK ANY OF THESE
CHILDREN ARE REALLY NASTY?
WHICH ONE WOULD YOU
LIKE TO PLAY WITH?
ALMOST ALL OF THE
WHITE CHILDREN CHOOSE
THE WHITE CHILD FOR THE
GOOD THINGS AND, MORE OFTEN,
CHOOSE EVERYONE
ELSE FOR THE BAD.
THE ASTONISHING THING
IS THAT HALF THE TIME
THE BLACK CHILDREN
DO THE SAME.
WHICH ONE WOULD YOU
LIKE TO PLAY WITH?
THIS ONE.
WHY DO YOU THINK THESE
ONES WLD BE REALLY SMART
AND KNOW ALL THEIR
NUMBERS AND THEIR LETTERS?
BECAUSE THEY GOT
A WHITE FACE.
WHICH ONE WOULD YOU LIKE
TO HAVE OVER TO YOUR HOUSE
TO PLAY THE MOST?
- THIS ONE.
WHICH ONE WOULD
YOU LIKE THE BEST?
YOU'D LIKE THAT
ONE THE BEST?
DO YOU THINK THAT ANY OF
THESE CHILDREN SNATCH THINGS?
WHO DO YOU THINK WOULD
GET INTO TROUBLE?
WHAT'S SHOCKING IS THAT
WHILE MOST WHITE CHILDREN
PREFER PEOPLE
LIKE THEMSELVES,
THE SAME ISN'T THE CASE
WITH BLACK CHILDREN.
NORMALLY 4-YEAR-OLDS
PREFER OTHERS LIKE THEM.
THE FACT THAT BLACK
CHILDREN DON'T,
SHOWS THAT THEY'RE PICKING
UP ON RACIAL STEREOTYPES
THAT FAVOR WHITES.
AND THE WHITE CHILDREN ARE
PICKING UP ON THEM, TOO.
THESE STEREOTYPES NEED TO
BE CONSTANTLY CHALLENGED
IF THEY'RE NOT GOING
TO BECOME ENTRENCHED.
SO WHAT MESSAGES HAS
TYRESE BEEN PICKING UP?
WHICH ONE DO YOU THINK
WOULD BE CLEVER?
WHICH ONE WOULD YOU
SHARE YOUR TOYS WITH?
LIKE TO PLAY WITH?
WHICH ONE WOULD YOU LIKE TO
SIT NEXT TO AT LUNCHTIME?
WHICH ONE WOULD
YOU LIKE THE BEST?
WHICH ONE, TYRESE,
WILL BE A POP STAR
WHEN THEY'RE BIG,
DO YOU THINK?
TYRESE HAD ONE OF THE
MOST POSITIVE ATTITUDES
OF ALL THE CHILDREN
TO BEING BLACK.
MARIE'S EFFORTS APPEAR
TO BE PAYING OFF.
SHE HOPES THIS AND HER
BRAND OF TOUGH LOVE
WILL SEE HIM THROUGH.
IF I CAN GIVE HIM
WHAT I'VE LEARNED,
THEN THINGS WILL BE,
NOT NECESSARILY EASIER,
BUT HE'LL UNDERSTAND WHY
THINGS ARE HAPPENING
AND NOT TAKE THE SORT
OF KNOCK BACKS SO HARD
AND THAT IT'S PART OF
LIFE AND LIFE IS CRAP.
OKAY, SO WE'RE HAVING
SHABBAT PARTY TODAY.
WHAT DO WE DO
FOR SHABBAT?
FOR REBECCA, ETHNICITY IS
ALSO PLAYING A BIG PART
IN HER DEVELOPING
SENSE OF HER IDENTITY.
MOMMY CAN GET
THE TABLE READY,
THE SPECIAL
TABLE FOR SHABBAT.
REBECCA IS JEWISH.
SHE'S GROWING UP IN A
STRONG JEWISH COMMUNITY,
ATTENDS A JEWISH
SCHOOL AND, AT FOUR,
IS STARTING
TO LEARN HEBREW.
SAY SHABBAT SHALOM
TO EVERYBODY.
EVEN THIS YOUNG,
CHILDREN ARE ABLE TO
ENGAGE WITH DIFFERENT
PARTS OF THEIR IDENTITY
IN DIFFERENT SETTINGS.
SO IS THAT REFLECTED IN
HOW REBECCA EATS AT SCHOOL?
IT'S NOT UNCOMMON FOR
PICKY EATERS TO EAT BETTER
IN A MORE
REGIMENTED ENVIRONMENT.
IT SEEMS FOOD BATTLES
MAY BE LIMITED TO HOME.
TONIGHT THE SAUNDERS ARE
CELEBRATING ANOTHER PART
OF THEIR IDENTITY.
THEY'RE GETTING READY
FOR A BIG ENGLAND MATCH.
GILL'S IN THE KITCHEN
REINFORCING REBECCA'S
IDENTITY AS A GOOD GIRL.
LET'S SEE WHAT
SOME OF THEM SAY.
REBECCA WAS VERY BRAVE
WHEN SHE HURT HER FINGERS.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
YOU DIDN'T...
CRY.
YOU DIDN'T CRY.
ELSEWHERE THE REST OF THE
FAMILY ARE INDULGING
IN AN ORGY OF
NATIONAL PRIDE.
I THINK EVERY PUBLIC
BUILDING IN THIS COUNTRY
SHOULD FLY THE UNION JACK
AND THE ENGLISH CROSS.
WHAT ARE DADDY
AND DAVID LIKE
WHEN THERE'S FOOTBALL
ON, REBECCA?
MAD.
DO YOU KNOW WHAT THAT
FLAG IS ON YOUR FACE?
WHO'S THE FLAG FOR?
ENGLAND.
WHERE ARE YOU FROM?
LIKE ALL CHILDREN,
REBECCA'S IDENTITY
IS MADE UP OF LOTS
OF DIFFERENT PARTS,
BUT IS ONE STRONGER
THAN ANOTHER?
A SENSE OF NATIONAL
IDENTITY IS ONE OF THE
LAST ELEMENTS TO
FALL INTO PLACE.
WHERE DO YOU LIVE?
HERE.
IN THIS PLACE.
(FALLS OFF CHAIR).
WHAT COUNTRY
DO YOU LIVE IN?
UH, IT'S SOMETHING.
HEY?
SOMETHING. SOMETHING...
I DON'T KNOW
WHAT IT'S CALLED.
JAMAICA.
ASDA.
ARE YOU BRITISH?
- NO.
ARE YOU SCOTTISH?
ARE YOU WELSH?
- NO.
ARE YOU ENGLISH?
MOST OF OUR CHILDREN
DON'T HAVE A CLUE
ABOUT NATIONALITY.
SO HOW DOES REBECCA
SEE HERSELF?
WELSH?
ENGLISH?
IRISH?
OR SOMETHING ELSE?
JEWISH?
IT SEEMS JEWISHNESS IS
ONE OF THE MORE IMPORTANT
ASPECTS OF
REBECCA'S IDENTITY.
EAGER TO EXPAND HER
CHILDREN'S HORIZONS,
GILLIAN ROBERTS HAS TAKEN
THE FAMILY ABROAD TO FRANCE.
THAT MAN'S GOT A PROPER
FRENCH BERET ON HIS HEAD,
DOESN'T HE?
WATCH WHAT IT DOES.
IT TURNS ON BY ITSELF.
I CAN'T STOP IT, IT
JUST DOES IT ITSELF.
THAT'S FOR WASHING
FRENCH PEOPLES' BOTTOMS.
IT IS!
UN, DEUX, TROIS, QUATRE,
CANQ - OR IT CAN BE 'CINQ'
- SIX, SEPT, HUIT, NEUF,
DIX, ONZE, DOUZE, TREIZE...
UN, QUATRE, SIX,
SEPT, UM, QUATRE.
BUT IN SPITE OF HIS
SISTER ALICE'S EFFORTS
TO MAKE HIM A BIT
MORE INTERNATIONAL,
WILLIAM'S MISSING
HIS HOME COMFORTS.
FRANCE NOT NICE.
WHY?
BECAUSE IT DOESN'T HAVE
ANY FISH AND CHIPS
AND BATTERED SAUSAGE.
OTHER MEMORIES OF HOME
ARE INTRUDING ON HIS
PARENTS' PLEASURE.
GILLIAN'S GOT HER WAY
AND SOLD THE HOUSE
ALTHOUGH THEY'VE
NOWHERE TO MOVE TO.
YOU KNOW, ONE OF NEIL'S
MOTHER'S REASONS
THAT WE SHOULDN'T SELL
THE HOUSE IS BECAUSE
WHEN ONE OF THE CHILDREN
BECOMES A VET IN SETTLE
THEY'LL NEED A HOUSE
IN SETTLE TO LIVE IN.
WILLIAM'S PICKING UP ON THE
TENSION IN THE HOUSEHOLD
AND FIGHTING TO GET HIS
WAY IS BECOMING THE NORM.
HIS CONSTANT ATTEMPTS
TO ASSERT HIMSELF
ARE PROVING DIFFICULT FOR
EVERYONE TO LIVE WITH.
WELL, YOU KNOW,
HE LIKES RUGBY.
WELL, HE THINKS RUGBY'S
SO ROUGH THAT HE WANTS
TO BE ROUGH WITH
HIS FAMILY.
I DON'T LIKE IT AT ALL.
AT THIS AGE, BOYS WITH A
STRONG MASCULINE IDENTITY
OFTEN START TESTING OUT
THOSE CLOSEST TO THEM
TO SEE WHO'S STRONGEST.
AND NOW THE TWO MOST
FORCEFUL MEMBERS OF THE
ROBERTS' FAMILY ARE
FINDING THEMSELVES
ENGAGED IN A
BATTLE OF WILLS.
ONE DAY SOMEBODY'S GOING
TO COME AND FIGHT WITH YOU
AND YOU'LL WISH THAT
YOU HADN'T STARTED IT
BECAUSE THEY'LL
HURT YOU.
NO, I WILL BE CAREFUL
AND I'LL BITE THEM.
WELL, IT WILL SERVE
YOU RIGHT IF SOMEONE
JUST HURTS YOU, WILLIAM.
WILLIAM THINKS HS THE
BEST AT EVERYTHING
BUT HE WILL LEARN SOONER
OR LATER THAT HE'S NOT.
HE'S NOT QUITE AS
CLEVER AS HE THINKS.
HE'S NOT QUITE
AS CLEVER AS ME.
WE'VE SPENT ALL THIS TIME
TRYING TO MAKE SURE THAT
WILLIAM'S CONFIDENT
AND WHAT'S HAPPENED?
HE'S TOO CONFIDENT.
AND NOW WE WANT HIM
TO BE LESS CONFIDENT.
NO, THAT'S BABYLISH,
THAT'S BABYLISH.
SOMEBODY WANTS THE CONFIDENCE
KNOCKED OUT OF HIM.
OH, THAT'S JUST BABYLISH,
THAT'S BABYLISH.
IT'S NOT JUST HIS
MOTHER HE'S TAKING ON.
WILLIAM'S PURSUING A
SINGLE-MINDED CAMPAIGN
TO ASSERT HIMSELF OV
HIS OLDER SIBLINGS.
HE'S ALWAYS HITTING PEOPLE,
PULLING THEM AROUND.
THROWING THINGS AT
THEM, BITING THEM,
AND SOMETIMES IT'S
HARD TO LIKE HIM.
OH, I DON'T KNOW WHAT'S
HAPPENED TO HIM.
BEING TOLD OFF HE OFTEN
LAUGHS IN YOUR FACE.
HE LAUGHS AT YOU.
HE DOESN'T CARE.
YOU CAN BE THERE
SHOUTING AND RAVING.
AND EVEN YOU
CAN SLAP HIM.
"THAT DIDN'T HURT
ME - HA HA HA".
HE'S JUST, HE'S SO
FULL OF HIMSELF.
WHAT'S HE DOING?
NO, WILLIAM, NO!
NO!
HE'S ALWAYS THE AGGRESSOR.
DON'T BE LIKE A CRYBABY!
LOOK, HE'S THROWING
STONES AT CHARLES.
YOU'RE BEING A
BABY, WILLIAM.
NO, YOU'RE BEING A BABY.
HE JUST KNOWS HOW
TO GET TO PEOPLE.
HE KNOWS HOW TO
UPSET PEOPLE.
HE KNOWS HOW
TO UPSET ME.
BACK IN PECKHAM, JAMES
CACHIA'S FAMILY HAVE
COME BACK TO THE FLAT
TO COLLECT A FEW THINGS.
BUT WHILE THEY'VE BEEN
AWAY, CAROL'S EX-BOYFRIEND
HAS BEEN ROUND AGAIN
AND HELPED HIMSELF.
LOOK, OUR SOFA'S GONE.
LOOK, FOOTBALL!
HE TOOK THE SOFAS
AND OUR COOKER.
I RECKON HE'S SOLD THEM.
BUT CAROL'S FINALLY
HAD SOME GOOD NEWS.
THEY'VE FOUND ME
SOMEWHERE TO STAY, SO...
WHAT KIND OF PLACE
ARE YOU GOING TO?
A WOMEN'S REFUGE.
WHAT ARE YOU EXPECTING
IT WILL BE LIKE?
WELL, I'M NOT ALLOWED
TO BRING FRIENDS THERE.
I DUNNO.
A CALL CAROL MADE TO A
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE HELP LINE
HAS PAID OFF.
SHE'S BEEN TOLD SHS
GOT TO LEAVE THE FLAT
STRAIGHT AWAY.
BERNIE, COME AND
GET SOME BAGS.
CLIMB OVER AND GET
JAMES'S TRAINERS, WILL YOU?
SCARED HER EX-BOYFRIEND
WILL RETURN,
CAROL'S GATHERED TOGETHER
WHAT SHE CAN CARRY.
FOR JAMES IT MEANS LEAVING
MOST OF HIS TOYS BEHIND.
BUT I'LL MISS
THAT CAR CAR.
ARE YOU TAKING THAT
ELMO OR NOT, JAMES?
PUT ELMO IN! PUT ELMO IN.
ALRIGHT, JAMES.
IT'S TOO HEAVY
TO CARRY, MAN.
I'M FED UP OF IT.
FED UP OF COMING
BACKWARDS AND FORWARDS.
OH, PISS OFF!
GOODBYE, SHITHOLE.
OH, LOOK. HIS
SKATEBOARD'S THERE.
JAMES!
RIGHT, THAT'S IT.
GET DOWN.
RIGHT, WE'LL
GO WITHOUT YOU.
SEE YOU LATER.
AS JAMES, CAROL, AND
BERNIE PREPARE TO LEAVE
PECKHAM FOR GOOD, THE
SHADOW THEY'VE BEEN
LIVING UNDER ALREADY
SEEMS TO BE LIFTING.
AND WE'RE MOVING ON
THE RIGHT DAY AS WELL.
NICE AND SUNNY.
BRILLIANT.
THE REFUGE IS ONLY A
TEMPORARY SOLUTION
UNTIL THEY CAN FIND
A PERMANENT NEW HOME.
BUT IT'S A START.
WE'RE JUST GOING TO MEET
THE LADIES AND GET INTO
THE HOSTEL AND THAT.
YOU KNOW, I AIN'T
EVEN GOT A BAG.
CAROL'S ARRANGED TO MEET
TWO WOMEN FROM THE REFUGE
ON A STREET CORNER
WHO'LL TAKE THEM TO
A SECR LOCATION.
I'LL JUST GO AND
GET MY LITTLE BOY.
HE'S FAST OUT.
FOR THE FAMILY'S SAFETY
WE'RE NOT ALLOWED
TO FOLLOW THEM.
AT THE END OF THEIR FIFTH
YEAR, MOST CHILDREN ARE
BEGINNING TO DEVELOP A
PICTURE OF THEMSELVES
TRAVELING THROUGH LIFE.
AND FOR THE FIRST
TIME OUR CHILDREN ARE
BEGINNING TO REALIZE
THEY HAVA PAST.
AND, MORE
IMPORTANTLY, A FUTURE.
WH YOU GROW UP, WHAT DO
YOU THINK YOU WANT TO BE?
A RABBIT.
A CLIMBING GIRL.
A FIREMAN.
BALLERINA.
WHAT ABOUT JAMES?
I DON'T KNOW.
JAMES IS STILL LOCKED
IN THE PRESENT.
WILLIAM HAS NO
SUCH DOUBTS.
POLICEMAN.
IT'S MOVING DAY
FOR THE ROBERTS.
GILLIAN'S FOUND
HER DREAM COTTAGE.
BUT LIFE IN A BIG NEW
HOUSE ISN'T ALWAYS
A GAME OF HAPPY FAMILIES.
WILLIAM'S GOT STRAIGHT
TO WORK ESTABLISHING
HIS DOMINANT POSITION
IN THE NEW HOUSE.
ARGHHHH.
CAN YOU PLEASE TRY
AND PLAY NICELY?
WHY ARE YOU KILLING ME?
FOR HIS OLDER BROTHER
CHARLES THERE'S NO LET UP.
AH, WILLIAM'S A BULLY BUT HE
SAYS ALL I DO IS ANNOY HIM.
THEY'LL FIND OUT
ABOUT YOU, WILLIAM.
THEY'LL ALL FIND
OUT ABOUT YOU.
MY BROTHER, THAT'S
WHY I HATE HIM.
WITH NEIL AT WORK,
GILLIAN'S LEFT WITH THE
MAMMOTH TASK OF SORTING OUT
THE HOUSE IN THE FACE OF
WILLIAM'S DETERMINATION
TO RULE THE ROOST.
CAN YOU PLEASE!
COME IN HERE
PLEASE, WILLIAM.
YOU COME IN HERE.
I KNOW WHAT YOU'RE DOING.
YOU'RE JUST TRYING TO
SPOIL CHARLES'S GAME
ON PURPOSE, AREN'T YOU?
WELL, SIT THERE IN THAT
CORNER AND THAT IS YOUR
NAUGHTY CORNER BECAUSE
YOU'VE BEEN A NAUGHTY BOY.
NOW YOU SIT DOWN IN
THE NAUGHTY CORNER
AND YOU STAY THERE.
NO, I WON'T.
GET BACK.
I'VE GOT OUT!
THERE'S NOTHING YOU
CAN DO WITH HIM.
STOP IT, CHARLES.
I HATE BALLET!
THE CHILDREN ARE SETTLING
IN BUT GILLIAN'S HAVING
A MOMENT OF SELF DOUBT
ABOUT WHETHER SHE'S DONE
THE RIGHT THING.
I'M JUST THINKING I'M
NOT VERY GOOD AT CHANGE.
I JUST THINK, CHRIST, I
HAVE MADE THIS HAPPEN.
WHY AM I DOING THIS?
AH, WELL, I'LL
GET OVER IT.
YOU SEE, THE THING
IS, IT'S DIFFERENT.
IF YOU DON'T HAVE ANY
CHOICE ABOUT MOVING
YOU DON'T HAVE ALL
THIS STRESS BECAUSE
YOU DON'T HAVE A
CHOICE, DO YOU?
IT DOESN TAKE GILLIAN
LONG TO BEGIN TO
APPRECIATE HER
NEW SURROUNDINGS.
FANTASTIC GOOSEBERRIES!
EVEN NEIL'S COMING ROUND TO
THE IDEA OF THE NEW HOUSE.
WHEN YOU COME
OUT HERE YOU THINK,
"OH, IT'S DEFINITELY
THE RIGHT THING".
IT'S BEAUTIFUL OUT
HERE, ISN'T IT?
WHAT MORE COULD
YOU WANT TO SEE?
WELL, A FEW SHEEP AS WELL.
AS LONG AS IT ISN'T
LAMBING TIME AND THEY'VE
BEEN SEPARATED AND THEY'RE
BLEATING THEIR HEADS OFF.
NO, IT'S BEEN VERY
NICE THIS, HASN'T IT?
AND WILLIAM AND GILLIAN ARE
FINDING SOME COMMON GROUND.
DO YOU LIKE THE COWS?
I LOVE COWS AND THINGS.
KEEP STILL AND QUIET
KEEP STILL AND QUIET.
KEEP STILL.
IT MIGHT ONLY BE A FEW
MILES OUT OF SETTLE,
BUT FOR GILLIAN THE MOVE IS
THE FIRST VICTORY IN HER
CAMPAIGN TO PROPEL WILLIAM
INTO A WIDER WORLD.
JAMES CACHIA HAS GOT
A NEW HOUSE, TOO.
IS THIS OUR HOUSE, MOM?
NICE DOOR, THOUGH.
IS THIS OUR HOUSE?
NICE DOOR.
HEY, OUR NEW HOUSE!
OH, YUCK!
OH, WELL, STAY OUT
THERE THEN, BERNIE.
OH, AT LEAST WE GOT AN
UPSTAIRS AND A DOWNSTAIRS.
I'VE GOT 10 CUPBOARDS
IN MY KITCHEN.
IT'S A NEW LIFE,
A NEW START.
THAT'S THE BEST
PRESENT I CAN EVER GET.
A ROUGH AREA COMPARED TO
PECKHAM BUT MY ROOM
IS BIGGER THAN
PECKHAM'S ONE.
WELL, I DIDN'T HAVE
A ROOM, ANYWAY.
THIS IS BIGGER, BERNIE'S
ROOM IS BIGGER.
I JUST COULDN'T WANT MORE
THAN WHAT I'VE ALREADY GOT
WITH HER FURNITURE
GONE AND NO MONEY,
CAROL HAS TO WAIT SIX WEEKS
BEFORE SHE CAN MOVE IN.
UNTIL THEN THE FLAT
WILL RAIN EMPTY.
MOMMY, LOOK.
YES, BERNIE.
IT CAME OFF.
BUT IT ISN'T LONG BEFORE
THE CHILDREN START TO
FIND FAULT WITH
THEIR NEW HO.
THIS IS A STUPID HOUSE.
YEAH, THAT'S RIGHT, JAMES.
I DON'T LIKE IT.
WELL, DON'T HAVE IT.
WE'LL STAY IN
THE HOSTEL THEN.
COULDN'T YOU CHOOSE A
BETTER HOUSE THAN THIS?
I HAD NO CHOICE.
I THINK EY'RE
QUITE CONFUSED ABOUT
WHAT'S GOING
ON AND THAT.
THEY JUST THINK THE
REFUGE IS OUR HOME.
THIS IS A STUPID
DUMBO HOUSE.
SO, YOU DON'T LIKE IT.
ALRIGHT, I'LL GIVE
IT BACK TO THE LADY.
I AM A BIT
DISAPPOINTED, YEAH.
A LOT.
DON'T!
THAT'S GAS.
DON'T PULL THAT OR
THERE'LL BE GAS EVERYWHERE.
DO IT AND I WILLLAP YOU.
CAROL'S MANAGED TO BRING
HER CHILDREN TO SAFETY
BUT THERE'S STILL A LONG
WAY TO GO BEFORE THIS CAN
BECOME A HOME.
I'M SHUTTING THE DOOR. LOUD.
DON'T, JAMES, BECAUSE
OF OUR NEIGHBORS.
SLAM THAT DOOR AGAIN!
SLAM IT AGAIN!
I DON'T LIKE
THIS WALLPAPER.
WHO'S IS THIS BALL?
IT'S YOURS.
I KNOW IT IS, WHO
WAS PLAYING WITH IT?
JAMES AND HIS SISTER HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED INTO A NEW SCHOOL.
JAMES IS DOING WELL.
HE'S STILL ABLE TO USE
SCHOOL AS A HAVEN
FROM THE CHAOS AT HOME.
AT THE MOMENT, JAMES'S
LIFE IS DOMINATED BY
THE CHANGES IN HIS
ENVIRONMENT BUT THERE ARE
OTHER PROFOUND
INFLUENCES ON JAMES:
HIS FAMILY AND HIS SCHOOL.
THESE AREAS OF CERTAINTY
WILL HELP SHAPE HIS IDENTITY
AND SO HIS FUTURE.
*
NEXT ON CHILD
OF OUR TIME,
HOW CHILDREN SPEND THEIR
TIME AND WHAT TELEVISION
AND COUTER GAMES
ARE DOING TO THEM.
*